.TH "ELOT --- Literate Ontology Tool for Emacs" "1" "" "" 
.RS
ELOT lets you author OWL ontologies in Org-mode, exporting to OWL
Manchester Syntax, HTML and PDF documentation, and running SPARQL,
ROBOT and rdfpuml against them from inside Emacs.

.RE
.SH "Preface"
.PP
ELOT --- the \fIEmacs Literate Ontology Tool\fP --- is a package for
authoring OWL ontologies in Org-mode.  A single Org file is both the
ontology source (tangled to OWL Manchester Syntax) and the published
documentation (exported to HTML, PDF, or Info).
.SS "Who this manual is for"
.IP \(em 4
\fBOntology authors\fP who want their ontology and its documentation to
stay in sync, automatically.
.IP \(em 4
\fBEmacs users\fP curious about how literate programming applies to
knowledge engineering.
.IP \(em 4
\fBNewcomers to OWL\fP who want a working ontology in front of them
before reading a 400-page semantic-web textbook.
.PP
No prior experience with OWL or Org-mode is assumed for Part I.
Parts II--IV assume you have completed the tutorial.
.SS "How to read this manual"
.PP
This manual follows the https://diataxis.fr/ \fBat\fP \fIDiátaxis\fP structure:
.IP \(em 4
Read custom-id:part-tutorial \fBat\fP \fIPart I\fP front-to-back the first time.
.IP \(em 4
Dip into custom-id:part-howto \fBat\fP \fIPart II\fP when you have a specific task.
.IP \(em 4
Consult custom-id:part-reference \fBat\fP \fIPart III\fP for lookups.
.IP \(em 4
Read custom-id:part-background \fBat\fP \fIPart IV\fP when you want to know \fIwhy\fP.
.SS "Conventions"
.IP \(em 4
\fIcode\fP face for CURIEs, IRIs, function names, file paths.
.IP \(em 4
\fI~C\-c C\-x r~\fP for keystrokes.
.IP \(em 4
\fIitalic\fP for new terms on first use.
.IP \(em 4
\fIM\-x command\-name\fP for interactive commands.
.SS "Getting help"
.IP \(em 4
Project home: \fIhttps://github.com/johanwk/elot\fP
.IP \(em 4
Issues and discussion: the GitHub tracker.
.IP \(em 4
The ELOT menu in any \fIelot\-mode\fP buffer lists the main commands.
.SH "Part I --- Tutorial"
.PP
This part is linear.  Read it in order; it walks a first-time user
through installing ELOT and building a small ontology end-to-end.
.SS "Installation"
.PP
The fastest path is via MELPA once ELOT is accepted there.  Until
then, install from Git.
.SS "Prerequisites"
.IP \(em 4
\fBEmacs 30.1 or later\fP.  ELOT uses \fIpeg.el\fP, which became a built-in
library in 30.1.
.IP \(em 4
\fBJava 11 or later\fP, required by ROBOT.
.IP \(em 4
\fBhttps://github.com/ontodev/robot \fBat\fP \fIROBOT\fP\fP, an OWL command-line tool.  Download \fIrobot.jar\fP from the
ROBOT releases page and note its path.
.IP \(em 4
\fBhttps://plantuml.com/ \fBat\fP \fIPlantUML\fP\fP (optional), for diagram rendering via \fIrdfpuml\fP.
.IP \(em 4
\fBProtégé 5.6\fP (optional), for cross-checking ontologies in a GUI.
.SS "Install ELOT from MELPA"
.PP
When ELOT is on MELPA:
.RS
.nf
\fC(use-package elot
  :ensure t)
\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
That is the whole installation.  \fIelot\-mode\fP is autoloaded.
.SS "Install ELOT from Git"
.PP
Until the MELPA recipe lands, clone the repository and add it to
your load path:
.RS
.nf
\fCgit clone https://github.com/johanwk/elot ~/src/elot
\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
In your \fIinit.el\fP:
.RS
.nf
\fC(add-to-list 'load-path "~/src/elot/elot-package")
(require 'elot)
\fP
.fi
.RE
.SS "Point ELOT at ROBOT"
.PP
Set \fIelot\-robot\-jar\-path\fP to the absolute path of your downloaded
\fIrobot.jar\fP:
.RS
.nf
\fC(setq elot-robot-jar-path "~/bin/robot.jar")
\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
You can also customize it via \fIM\-x customize\-variable RET
elot\-robot\-jar\-path\fP.
.SS "Verify"
.PP
Open an Org file and run \fIM\-x elot\-mode\fP.  The ELOT menu appears in
the menu bar.  \fIM\-x elot\-version\fP prints the loaded version.
.PP
If something goes wrong, see custom-id:app-troubleshooting \fBat\fP \fITroubleshooting and FAQ\fP.
.SS "Your first ontology"
.PP
In this chapter you build a tiny ontology of \fIpets\fP from scratch.
By the end you will have:
.IP \(em 4
a working \fIpets.org\fP file you can re-tangle and re-export at will,
.IP \(em 4
a generated \fIpets.omn\fP ontology in OWL Manchester Syntax,
.IP \(em 4
the start of an HTML render of your ontology document.
.PP
Time required: 15--20 minutes.
.SS "Create the file"
.PP
Create \fIpets.org\fP anywhere in your filesystem and paste the
skeleton below.  Open it in Emacs and run \fIM\-x elot\-mode\fP.
.RS
.nf
\fC#+TITLE: A tiny ontology of pets
#+AUTHOR: Your Name

* Prefixes
,:PROPERTIES:
,:header-args:emacs-lisp+: :tangle no
,:END:

#+name: prefix-table
,| prefix | uri                                            |
,|--------+------------------------------------------------|
,| ex     | http://example.org/pets/                       |
,| owl    | http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#                 |
,| rdfs   | http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#          |
,| skos   | http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#           |

* ex:pets
,:PROPERTIES:
,:ID:       pets-ontology
,:ontology-iri: http://example.org/pets/
,:END:

A small example ontology used by the ELOT tutorial.

** Classes
*** ex:Animal
A living creature.

*** ex:Dog
,:PROPERTIES:
,:subclass-of: ex:Animal
,:END:
A dog is an animal.

*** ex:Cat
,:PROPERTIES:
,:subclass-of: ex:Animal
,:END:
A cat is an animal.
\fP
.fi
.RE
.SS "Tangle to OWL Manchester Syntax"
.PP
With point anywhere in \fIpets.org\fP, run \fIM\-x elot\-tangle\fP.  A file
\fIpets.omn\fP appears next to your Org source.  Open it; you should
see Manchester-syntax declarations for \fIex:Animal\fP, \fIex:Dog\fP and
\fIex:Cat\fP.
.SS "Sanity-check with ROBOT"
.PP
From a shell:
.RS
.nf
\fCrobot report --input pets.omn --output pets-report.tsv
\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
ROBOT’s report should be empty (or contain only INFO entries).
Errors mean ELOT generated something OWL does not like; see
custom-id:howto-lint \fBat\fP \fILinting and syntax checking\fP.
.SS "Where to next"
.IP \(em 4
custom-id:tut-axioms \fBat\fP \fIAdding axioms and annotations\fP --- give your classes proper
definitions and relationships.
.IP \(em 4
custom-id:tut-export \fBat\fP \fIExporting to OWL and HTML\fP --- produce a polished document.
.SS "Adding axioms and annotations"
.PP
TODO --- expand.
.PP
This chapter extends the \fIpets.org\fP ontology from
custom-id:tut-first-ontology \fBat\fP \fIthe previous chapter\fP with:
.IP \(em 4
\fIrdfs:label\fP and \fIskos:definition\fP annotations on every class,
.IP \(em 4
a \fIdisjointWith\fP axiom between \fIex:Dog\fP and \fIex:Cat\fP,
.IP \(em 4
an object property \fIex:chases\fP with \fIrdfs:domain\fP and \fIrdfs:range\fP,
.IP \(em 4
an existential restriction: every \fIex:Dog\fP \fIchases some\fP \fIex:Cat\fP.
.SS "Annotations"
.PP
Use the \fI:annotations:\fP drawer key to attach annotations to a class:
.RS
.nf
\fC*** ex:Dog
,:PROPERTIES:
,:subclass-of: ex:Animal
,:END:
,:annotations:
,- rdfs:label :: "Dog"@en
,- skos:definition :: "A domesticated canine."@en
,:end:
\fP
.fi
.RE
.SS "Object properties"
.PP
TODO --- show the property declaration and the existential restriction.
.SS "Disjointness"
.PP
TODO --- show \fIdisjointWith\fP and how it appears in the tangled OMN.
.SS "Exporting to OWL and HTML"
.PP
TODO --- expand.
.PP
This chapter walks through the two export targets that matter to
most authors:
.IP 1.  4
\fBOWL Manchester Syntax\fP via \fIM\-x elot\-tangle\fP (you already saw
this in custom-id:tut-first-ontology \fBat\fP \fIYour first ontology\fP).
.IP 2.  4
\fBHTML documentation\fP via Org’s standard exporter (\fIC\-c C\-e h h\fP)
plus the bundled \fItheme\-readtheorg.setup\fP.
.SS "Adding the theme"
.PP
Put this line near the top of your ontology Org file:
.RS
.nf
\fC#+SETUPFILE: theme-readtheorg.setup
\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
Re-export with \fIC\-c C\-e h h\fP; the resulting HTML uses the ELOT
theme.
.SS "PDF and Info"
.PP
For PDF: \fIC\-c C\-e l p\fP.  For Info (Emacs help format):
\fIC\-c C\-e i i\fP, then \fIinstall\-info\fP the result.
.SS "Publishing to GitHub Pages"
.PP
TODO --- recipe.
.SS "A first SPARQL query and rdfpuml diagram"
.PP
TODO --- expand.
.PP
This chapter introduces two of ELOT’s most-loved features:
.IP \(em 4
running \fBSPARQL\fP queries directly against your tangled \fI.omn\fP via
embedded source blocks,
.IP \(em 4
generating \fBPlantUML diagrams\fP of selected triples via the
\fIrdfpuml\-block\fP Library-of-Babel helper.
.SS "A first SPARQL block"
.PP
Add this to \fIpets.org\fP, below the class definitions:
.RS
.nf
\fC#+begin_src sparql :url "pets.omn"
,select ?s ?o where { ?s rdfs:subClassOf ?o }
#+end_src
\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
Press \fIC\-c C\-c\fP inside the block.  ELOT shells out to ROBOT and
inserts the result table below the block.  No \fIPREFIX\fP boilerplate
needed --- ELOT injects prefixes from your \fIprefix\-table\fP.
.SS "A first diagram"
.PP
TODO --- \fIrdfpuml\-block\fP example.
.PP
See custom-id:howto-querying \fBat\fP \fIQuerying with SPARQL and ROBOT\fP and custom-id:howto-diagrams \fBat\fP \fIDiagrams with rdfpuml\fP for
the full how-tos.
.SH "Part II --- How-to guides"
.PP
Each guide is self-contained, task-oriented, and answers a single
“how do I ...?” question.  Read only the ones you need.
.SS "Authoring"
.PP
TODO --- task-oriented recipes for day-to-day authoring:
.IP \(em 4
structuring a large ontology across multiple sections,
.IP \(em 4
using description-list items for annotations,
.IP \(em 4
working with \fI:annotations:\fP drawers,
.IP \(em 4
tempo templates for fast class / property insertion,
.IP \(em 4
using the ELOT easymenu.
.SS "Querying with SPARQL and ROBOT"
.PP
TODO.
.PP
Covers:
.IP \(em 4
the ELOT \fIorg\-babel\-execute:sparql\fP advice and how \fI:url\fP dispatches
to ROBOT (for local \fI.omn\fP files) or to a remote endpoint,
.IP \(em 4
prefix injection from \fIorg\-link\-abbrev\-alist\-local\fP and the merge
rules with inline \fIPREFIX\fP declarations,
.IP \(em 4
result formats (\fIcsv\fP vs \fIttl\fP),
.IP \(em 4
known gotchas (empty result sets, non-ASCII queries).
.SS "Diagrams with rdfpuml and Library-of-Babel helpers"
.PP
TODO.
.PP
Covers \fIrdfpuml\-block\fP, \fIkill\-prefixes\fP, and the supported
\fI#+call:\fP helpers in \fIelot\-lob.org\fP.
.SS "Label display"
.PP
TODO --- migrate content from \fIREADME\-global\-label\-display.org\fP
into this chapter.
.PP
Covers buffer-local label overlays, the global label-display mode,
the label database, and label display in \fI*xref*\fP /
\fI*ELOT Describe*\fP buffers.
.SS "Importing existing OWL ontologies"
.PP
TODO --- ROBOT-based round-tripping of an existing ontology
(\fI.owl\fP / \fI.ttl\fP / \fI.omn\fP) into an ELOT Org skeleton.
.SS "Linting and syntax checking"
.PP
TODO --- \fIelot\-lint\fP, the OMN PEG grammar, the Flymake backend.
.SS "Working with multiple ontologies and imports"
.PP
TODO --- \fIowl:imports\fP, catalog files, working tree layout for
multi-ontology projects.
.SS "Collaborating via Git"
.PP
TODO --- diff-friendly Org structure, recommended \fI.gitattributes\fP,
review workflow for ontology PRs.
.SH "Part III --- Reference"
.PP
Exhaustive lookup material.  Most of this part is auto-generated by
\fImake manual\-reference\fP from the live ELOT sources; do not edit the
generated files by hand.
.SS "Commands and keybindings"
.PP
This chapter is auto-generated by \fImake manual\-reference\fP.  Do not
edit by hand; edit the docstrings in the source instead.
.TS
 center,box;

l l l .
Command	Key	Description
_
\fIelot\-describe\-curie\-at\-point\fP	==	Pop up a \fBHelp\fP buffer describing CURIE at point (or prompt).
\fIelot\-flymake\-setup\fP	==	Enable the ELOT Flymake backend in the current buffer.
\fIelot\-global\-label\-display\-mode\fP	==	Display labels from ELOT active label sources in any buffer.
\fIelot\-global\-label\-display\-setup\fP	==	One-shot: (re)build the DB-driven font-lock regexp in this buffer.
\fIelot\-headings\-from\-table\fP	==	Convert the Org table at point to an ELOT outline.
\fIelot\-label\-activate\-source\fP	==	Activate (SOURCE DATA-SOURCE) in `elot-active-label-sources’.
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-add\fP	==	Activate a registered source in the origin buffer.
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-mode\fP	==	Major mode for reordering `elot-active-label-sources’.
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-move\-down\fP	==	Move the entry at point one position down (toward lower priority).
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-move\-up\fP	==	Move the entry at point one position up (toward higher priority).
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-persist\fP	==	Persist the origin buffer’s `elot-active-label-sources’ to `.dir-locals.el’.
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-refresh\fP	==	Re-read the origin buffer’s active sources and redraw.
\fIelot\-label\-active\-sources\-remove\fP	==	Remove the entry at point from `elot-active-label-sources’.
\fIelot\-label\-deactivate\-source\fP	==	Remove (SOURCE DATA-SOURCE) from `elot-active-label-sources’.
\fIelot\-label\-display\-setup\fP	==	Read identifier-label pairs and initialise label-display.
\fIelot\-label\-list\-active\-sources\fP	==	Display a tabulated buffer for reordering `elot-active-label-sources’.
\fIelot\-label\-list\-sources\fP	==	Display a tabulated list of all registered ELOT label sources.
\fIelot\-label\-list\-sources\-refresh\fP	==	Rebuild the \fBELOT Label Sources\fP buffer from the DB.
\fIelot\-label\-list\-sources\-refresh\-entry\fP	==	Force-refresh the source at point.
\fIelot\-label\-list\-sources\-unregister\-entry\fP	==	Unregister the source at point.
\fIelot\-label\-lookup\fP	\fIC\-c C\-x r\fP	Interactive lookup of resource identifier, with completion.
\fIelot\-label\-lookup\-external\fP	==	Run `elot-label-lookup’ pinned to scope `external’.
\fIelot\-label\-lookup\-local\fP	==	Run `elot-label-lookup’ pinned to scope `local’.
\fIelot\-label\-move\-source\-down\fP	==	Move (SOURCE DATA-SOURCE) one position down (toward lower priority).
\fIelot\-label\-move\-source\-up\fP	==	Move (SOURCE DATA-SOURCE) one position up (toward higher priority).
\fIelot\-label\-refresh\-all\-sources\fP	==	Refresh every registered source, continuing past individual failures.
\fIelot\-label\-refresh\-source\fP	==	Force a re-parse of SOURCE (optionally scoped to DATA-SOURCE).
\fIelot\-label\-register\-current\-buffer\fP	==	Register the file visited by the current buffer as a label source.
\fIelot\-label\-register\-source\fP	==	Register SOURCE (a file path) in the ELOT label cache.
\fIelot\-label\-set\-active\-sources\fP	==	Replace `elot-active-label-sources’ with ENTRIES.
\fIelot\-label\-sources\-mode\fP	==	Major mode for listing registered ELOT label sources.
\fIelot\-label\-unregister\-source\fP	==	Remove SOURCE (optionally scoped to DATA-SOURCE) from the DB.
\fIelot\-menu\fP	==	ELOT Ontology Authoring Menu
\fIelot\-mode\fP	==	Minor mode for authoring OWL ontologies in Org-mode with ELOT.
\fIelot\-open\-owl\fP	==	Open an OWL ontology from OWL-SOURCE by converting with `elot-exporter’.
\fIelot\-org\-lint\fP	==	Refresh `elot-slurp’, then do `org-lint’
\fIelot\-tangle\-buffer\-to\-omn\fP	==	Update hierarchy and export OMN for all ontologies to their tangle targets.
\fIelot\-toggle\-label\-display\fP	==	Toggle between showing identifier or rdfs:label, using `elot-label-display’.
\fIelot\-update\-headline\-hierarchy\fP	==	Update `elot-headline-hierarchy’ from the current org buffer.
.TE
.TB ""
.SS "Customization variables"
.PP
Auto-generated by \fImake manual\-reference\fP.
.TS
 center,box;

l l l l .
Variable	Default	Group	Description
_
\fIelot\-db\-default\-global\-prefixes\fP	\fI(("rdf" . "http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22\-rdf\-syntax\-ns#") ("rdfs" . "http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf\-schema#") ("owl" . "http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#") ("xsd" . "http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#") ("skos" . "http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#") ("dcterms" . "http://purl.org/dc/terms/") ("foaf" . "http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/") ("obo" . "http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/") ("sh" . "http://www.w3.org/ns/shacl#") ("prov" . "http://www.w3.org/ns/prov#"))\fP	\fIelot\fP	Seed entries for the `global\d\s-2prefixes\s+2\u’ table.
\fIelot\-db\-file\fP	\fI"~/.emacs.d/elot\-cache.sqlite"\fP	\fIelot\fP	Path to the SQLite file backing the ELOT global-slurp cache.
\fIelot\-default\-image\-path\fP	\fI"./images/"\fP	\fIelot\fP	ELOT default output directory for generated images.
\fIelot\-exporter\-jar\-path\fP	\fI"c:/Users/jowik/bin/elot\-exporter.jar"\fP	\fIelot\fP	Path to the elot-exporter.jar file.
\fIelot\-flymake\-checkers\fP	\fI(elot/nodeclare\-id\-prefix\-label elot/ontology\-header elot/prefix\-table elot/ontology\-presence elot/required\-sections elot/description\-list\-curies elot/axiom\-value\-curies elot/omn\-syntax)\fP	\fIelot\fP	List of `org-lint’ checker names to run via Flymake.
\fIelot\-global\-label\-display\-eldoc\fP	\fIt\fP	\fIelot\fP	Whether `elot-global-label-display-mode’ registers an eldoc backend.
\fIelot\-global\-label\-display\-max\-ids\fP	\fI10000\fP	\fIelot\fP	Soft cap on the number of ids fed to `regexp-opt’ by the global mode.
\fIelot\-global\-label\-display\-mode\-hook\fP	\fInil\fP	\fIelot\fP	Hook run after entering or leaving `elot-global-label-display-mode’.
\fIelot\-global\-label\-display\-show\-source\fP	\fIt\fP	\fIelot\fP	Whether the eldoc/hover summary carries a provenance marker.
\fIelot\-label\-display\-face\fP	\fIelot\-label\-face\fP	\fIelot\fP	Customizable face used for ELOT label fontification.
\fIelot\-label\-display\-size\-threshold\fP	\fI512000\fP	\fIelot\fP	Buffer size (bytes) above which `elot-mode’ asks before enabling label-display.
\fIelot\-label\-lookup\-scope\fP	\fIboth\fP	\fIelot\fP	Which label sources `elot-label-lookup’ consults.
\fIelot\-mode\-auto\-detect\fP	\fIt\fP	\fIelot\fP	When non-nil, automatically enable `elot-mode’ in ELOT buffers.
\fIelot\-mode\-hook\fP	\fInil\fP	\fIelot\fP	Hook run after entering or leaving `elot-mode’.
\fIelot\-preferred\-languages\fP	\fInil\fP	\fIelot\fP	Ordered list of preferred language tags for labels and annotations.
\fIelot\-rdfpuml\-command\-str\fP	\fI"rdfpuml"\fP	\fIelot\fP	Command to execute `rdfpuml’.
\fIelot\-rdfpuml\-options\fP	="hide empty members
.TE
.TB ""
.PP
hide circle
skinparam classAttributeIconSize 0"= | \fIelot\fP | Default options for rdfpuml. |
.TS
 center,box;

l l l l .
\fIelot\-rdfpuml\-path\fP	\fI"c:/Users/jowik/bin/rdf2rml/bin/rdfpuml.pl"\fP	\fIelot\fP	Path to the rdfpuml Perl program.
\fIelot\-robot\-jar\-path\fP	\fI"c:/Users/jowik/bin/robot.jar"\fP	\fIelot\fP	Path to the robot.jar file.
\fIelot\-source\-rq\-cache\-dir\-name\fP	\fI".elot\-cache"\fP	\fIelot\fP	Directory name (relative to the project root) for cached .rq results.
\fIelot\-source\-supported\-extensions\fP	\fI(("org" . elot\-source\-parse\-org) ("csv" . elot\-source\-parse\-csv) ("tsv" . elot\-source\-parse\-tsv) ("json" . elot\-source\-parse\-json) ("ttl" . elot\-source\-parse\-ttl) ("rq" . elot\-source\-parse\-rq))\fP	\fIelot\fP	Alist mapping source file extensions to parser functions.
\fIelot\-source\-ttl\-label\-query\fP	="PREFIX rdfs: \fIhttp://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#\fP
.TE
.TB ""
.PP
SELECT ?id ?label (LANG(?label) AS ?lang) WHERE {
  ?id rdfs:label ?label .
}"= | \fIelot\fP | SPARQL query used by `elot-source-parse-ttl’ to extract id/label pairs. |
.TS
 center,box;

l l l l .
\fIelot\-toggle\-labels\-key\fP	\fInil\fP	\fIelot\fP	Key sequence bound to `elot-toggle-label-display’ in ELOT-relevant buffers.
.TE
.TB ""
.SS "File and header conventions"
.PP
TODO --- \fIprefix\-table\fP, \fI:ontology\-iri:\fP, \fI:subclass\-of:\fP,
\fI:annotations:\fP drawers, the declaration-tree heading shape.
.SS "\fI#+call:\fP helpers (Library of Babel)"
.PP
Auto-generated from \fIelot\-package/elot\-lob.org\fP by
\fImake manual\-reference\fP.
.TS
 center,box;

l l .
Block	Description
_
\fItheme\-readtheorg\fP	
\fItheme\-elot\fP	
\fIcurrent\-date\fP	
\fIcurrent\-datetime\fP	
\fIrobot\-metrics\fP	
\fIrobot\-sparql\-select\fP	
\fIttl\-Class\-hierarchy\fP	
\fIrdfpuml\-config\fP	
\fIrdfpuml\-config\-rangedomaindown\fP	
\fIrdfpuml\-config\-rangedown\fP	
\fIrdfpuml\-block\fP	
\fIexample\-ttl\fP	
\fIfuseki\-for\-rdfpuml\-ttl\fP	
\fIkill\-prefixes\fP	
.TE
.TB ""
.SS "Manchester Syntax cheatsheet"
.PP
TODO --- import \fIexamples/manchester\-syntax\-quick\-reference.omn\fP
with brief gloss on each construct.
.SS "Glossary"
.PP
TODO --- short definitions of CURIE, IRI, OMN, TTL, OWL, RDF,
ontology, axiom, restriction, annotation, tangle, prefix table,
label source, declaration tree.
.SH "Part IV --- Background"
.PP
Read these once.  They explain the \fIwhy\fP of design choices and the
shape of the codebase --- useful when something is surprising.
.SS "Why literate ontology engineering"
.PP
TODO --- the argument: ontology and documentation in one source;
review-friendly plaintext format; reuse of Org tooling; experience
from ISO 23726-3.
.SS "Architecture overview"
.PP
TODO --- the tangle pipeline; the label DB; the SPARQL advice
lifecycle; the relation between the literate \fI.org\fP sources and
the tangled \fIelot\-package/*.el\fP.
.SS "Relationship to other tools"
.PP
TODO --- where ELOT fits relative to Protégé, WIDOCO, ROBOT, OWL-CS,
ontology editors in general.
.SH "Appendices"
.SS "VS Code extension parity"
.PP
TODO --- table of features available in the Emacs package vs the VS
Code extension.  Mine \fICLI\-VS\-CODE\-PLAN.org\fP for content.
.SS "Troubleshooting and FAQ"
.PP
TODO --- common pitfalls:
.IP \(em 4
\fIelot\-robot\-jar\-path\fP unset or wrong,
.IP \(em 4
Java not on \fIPATH\fP,
.IP \(em 4
\fIpeg\fP library missing on Emacs 29,
.IP \(em 4
label display broken in \fI*xref*\fP buffers (now fixed; left as
example for future regressions),
.IP \(em 4
SPARQL block returns empty result set,
.IP \(em 4
tangled \fI.omn\fP fails ROBOT report.
.SS "Changelog pointers"
.PP
See https://github.com/johanwk/elot/releases \fBat\fP \fIthe release notes on GitHub\fP for the version-by-version history.
.SH "Indices"
.SH "Copying"
.PP
This manual is for ELOT, the Emacs Literate Ontology Tool.
.PP
Copyright (C) 2024--2026 Johan W. Klüwer and contributors.
.RS
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.

.RE
